.\"
.\" SuSE man page rwtab
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 SuSE Linux Products GmbH, Nuernberg, Germany.
.\" please send bugfixes or comments to http://www.suse.de/feedback.
.\"
.\"
.TH RWTAB 5 "December 18th, 2010" "Version 0.0" "Configuration for read-only root file systems"
.\"
.UC 5
.SH NAME
.\"
rwtab \- Configuration for read-only root file systems
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\"
.IR /etc/rwtab ", " /etc/rwtab.d
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The file /etc/rwtab and additional files in /etc/rwtab.d specify
locations on a read-only root file system which are made writable by
bind mounting a writable file system at that location.  These files are
processed at boot time after the local file systems have been mounted.

The following kernel command line options determine how rwtab processing
is done during boot:
.TP 1.5i
readonlyroot
Mount the root file system read-only.  Process rwtab and all files in
/etc/rwtab.d as described below.
.TP
.RI scratch= device
Mount \fIdevice\fR, and remove all files on this file
system.  If this option is not specified, a tmpfs file system is used instead.
.TP
.RI state= device
Mount \fIdevice\fR.  Alternatively, if a directory is specified instead of a device,
assume that the directory is the mount point of a local "auto" mount defined in
/etc/fstab (which is already mounted when this option is processed).

If this file system contains the files etc/rwtab or etc/rwtab.d, bind
mount these files over /etc/rwtab and /etc/rwtab.d, respectively, before
rwtab processing.
.P
Each line in rwtab files consists of a keyword followed by a
\fIpathname\fR.  Empty lines and lines starting with a hash character (#)
are ignored.  The following keywords are recognized:
.TP 1.5i
empty
Create a new directory \fIpathname\fR and all its parents on
the scratch file system, and bind mount it to \fIpathname\fR.
The pathname must be a directory.  If \fIpathname\fR does not exist
on the read-only root file system, do nothing.
.TP
dirs
Like empty, but copy all directories in the original
\fIpathname\fR to the writable scratch directory before bind mounting
the scratch directory over \fIpathname\fR.  Copying is recursive.  The
pathname must be a directory.
.TP
files
Like empty, but copy all files and directories in the original
\fIpathname\fR to the writable scratch directory before bind mounting
the scratch directory over \fIpathname\fR.  Copying is recursive. The
pathname can be a file or directory.
.TP
state
If \fIpathname\fR exists on the read-only root file system as well as on
the state file system (see the "state=\fIdevice\fR" kernel command line
parameter above), bind mount \fIpathname\fR on the state mount to
\fIpathname\fR on the read-only root file system.

When INIT_STATE_AUTOMATICALLY is set to "yes" in the sysconfig file
(which is the default),  files or directories which do not yet exist on
the state file system will be initialized by copying the files on the
read-only root file system to the state file system first.
.P
The state and scratch file systems are mounted as defined in the
syconfig file, and remain mounted at the specified locations (by
default /var/lib/readonlyroot/state and /var/lib/readonlyroot/scratch,
respectively).
.SH WARNING
When a file system is specified as a scratch area with the
"scratch=\fIdevice\fR" kernel command line parameter, all files on that
file system will be removed at boot time.
.SH SEE ALSO
.B /etc/sysconfig/readonlyroot
.SH COPYRIGHT
2010 SuSE Linux Products GmbH, Nuernberg, Germany.
.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Gruenbacher <agruen@suse.de>
